[[PAGE 1]]
Guidelines for the management and
     care of diabetes mellitus





           Quick reference guide


Diabetes mellitus is one of the most common noncommunicable diseases worldwide,
and its epidemic proportion has placed it at the forefront of public health challenges.
In the Eastern Mediterranean Region, there has been a rapid increase in the incidence
of diabetes mellitus, mainly of type 2. It is now the fourth leading cause of death in the
Region and an estimated 22 million people have diabetes out of a total adult population
of 290 million. This quick reference guide aims to provide a readily accessible overview
of the management and care of patients with diabetes mellitus.

[[PAGE 2]]
                                          ' HILQLWLRQ DQG GLDJQRVLV

' HILQLWLRQ

•  Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder of multiple etiology, characterized by chronic
   hyperglycaemia with disturbances of carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism resulting
   from defects in insulin secretion, insulin action, or both.

•  The effects of diabetes mellitus include long-term damage, dysfunction and failure of various
   organs.

' LDJQRVLV

•  The diagnosis of diabetes in an asymptomatic individual should never be made on the
   basis of a single abnormal glucose value. Verification of the diagnosis with repeat testing
    is required, unless an individual presents with unequivocal hyperglycaemia, along with its
   classic symptoms.

•  The following table outlines the diagnostic values for diabetes mellitus and other categories
   of hyperglycaemia.





             Diagnostic values for diabetes mellitus and other categories
                                  of hyperglycaemia



                                     Venous plasma glucose concentration
                                     mmol/L             mg/dL


   Diabetes mellitus
      fasting or                                  ≥7.0                 ≥126
     2-hour post-75 g glucose load               ≥11.1                ≥200
   IGT
      fasting (if measured) and                    <7.0                 <126
     2-hour post-75 g glucose load           ≥7.8 and <11.1         ≥140 and <200
   IFG
      fasting and (if measured)                ≥5.6 and <7.0         ≥100 and <126
     2-hour post-75 g glucose load                <7.8                 <140


  IGT: impaired glucose tolerance
  IFG: impaired fasting glucose





                                    2

[[PAGE 3]]
                          &ODVVLILFDWLRQ


•  There are two main types of diabetes mellitus:

   −  type 1, requiring insulin for survival
   −  type 2, may or may not require insulin for metabolic control.

•  Type 1 diabetes encompasses the majority of cases which are primarily due to pancreatic
    islet ß-cell destruction and are prone to ketoacidosis.

•  Type 2 includes the common major form of diabetes mellitus which results from defect(s)
   in insulin secretion, almost always with a major contribution from insulin resistance.

•  Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) refers to a condition intermediate between normoglycaemia
   and diabetes.

•  A clinical stage of impaired fasting glycaemia (IFG) has been introduced to classify individuals
  who have fasting glucose values above the normal range, but below that diagnostic of
   diabetes.

2 WKHUVSHFLILF W\SHV RI GLDEHWHV
•  Gestational diabetes is a state of carbohydrate intolerance resulting in hyperglycaemia of
   variable severity, with onset or first recognition during pregnancy. It does not exclude the
    possibility that the glucose intolerance may antedate pregnancy but has previously gone
   unrecognized. The definition applies irrespective of whether or not insulin is used for
   treatment or whether the condition persists after pregnancy.

•  Other less common causes of diabetes mellitus are conditions in which the underlying defect
   or disease process can be identified; these can be caused by:

   −  genetic defects in ß-cells, such as maturity onset diabetes of the young
   −  genetic defects in insulin action, such as Leprechaunism
   −  diseases of the exocrine pancreas
   −  endocrinopathies, such as Cushing syndrome, acromegaly and phaeochromocytoma
   −  drugs or chemicals, such as steroids and thiazides;
   −  infections, such as rubella;
   − uncommon forms of immune-related diabetes, such as the type associated with
       insulin-receptor antibodies;
   −  other rare genetic syndromes associated with diabetes, such as Klinefelter syndrome
     and Down syndrome.





                                     3

[[PAGE 4]]
                         6FUHHQLQJ

6FUHHQLQJ WRROV

Oral glucose tolerance test

•  This remains the definitive confirmatory diagnostic test for diabetes. Glucose levels ≥11.1
  mmol/L (200 mg/dL) 2 hours after a 75 g oral glucose load are diagnostic of diabetes.

Fasting plasma glucose

•  Fasting is defined as avoiding the consumption of any food or beverage, other than water, for
   at least 10–16 hours before testing. Fasting blood and plasma glucose levels are interpreted
   in the following table.



               Interpretation of fasting blood and plasma glucose levels


  Fasting plasma glucose              Interpretation


  <5.6 mmol/L (<100 mg/dL)           Excludes diabetes (probably)

  5.6–6.0 mmol/L (100–109 mg/dL)    Low probability, may be an indication for
                                        diagnostic testing among high risk individuals (OGTT)

  6.1–6.9 mmol/L (110–125 mg/dL)     Indication for diagnostic testing (OGTT)

  ≥7.0 mmol/L (≥126 mg/dL)            Indicates diabetes, confirmation with repeat
                                          testing required


  OGTT: oral glucose tolerance test

6FUHHQLQJ IRUW\SH  GLDEHWHV P HOOLWXV

•  Given current knowledge, screening can be recommended only for research purposes related
   to the prevention of type 1 diabetes mellitus.

6FUHHQLQJ IRUW\SH  GLDEHWHV P HOOLWXV

•  Among inhabitants of the Arabian Peninsula, the screening of asymptomatic adults for type
  2 diabetes mellitus should be done for the following groups. If results are normal, screening
   should be repeated every three years. High risk characteristics include:

   −  individuals aged ≥35 years
   −  overweight (body mass index ≥25 kg/m2)
   −  first-degree relative with type 2 diabetes
   − women with previous history of gestational diabetes mellitus or who delivered a baby
      weighing >4 kg
   −  individuals diagnosed previously with IFG or IGT
   −  hypertensive individual >140/90 mmHg
   − HDL cholesterol level ≤0.9 mmol/L (35 mg/dL) and/or triglyceride level >2.82 mmol/L
      (250 mg/dL)
   −  other medical conditions associated with insulin resistance, e.g. polycystic ovary
     syndrome or acanthosis nigricans
   −  history of vascular disease.

                                    4

[[PAGE 5]]
6XP P DU\

•  Screening for diabetes is justified on the grounds that early detection allows effective early
   intervention, thus diminishing the likelihood of the development of complications.

•  Selective high-risk and opportunistic screening must be accompanied by confirmatory
   diagnosis and appropriate follow-up of new cases.

•  Screening for IGT may be justified in high-risk populations but requires an OGTT for
   identification and a lifestyle intervention programme.

•  Screening programmes should, therefore, be evaluated in terms of:

   −  numbers of new cases detected
   −  cost per new case detected
   −  actions taken for individuals with positive test results
   −  long-term benefits of early detection.

•  People with screen-detected diabetes should be offered treatment and care.

•  Diabetes is associated with a range of serious complications which result in reduced quality
   of life and premature mortality. Early detection and treatment is one strategy proposed for
   reducing diabetes health burden.

                       0 DQDJHP HQW


•  The objectives of therapy for diabetes are to:

   −  eliminate symptoms of hyperglycaemia
   −  achieve optimum control
   −  reduce or eliminate microvascular and macrovascular complications of diabetes mellitus
   −  treat associated disorders
   −  allow the patient to achieve as normal a lifestyle as possible.
•  The markers for diabetes control are blood glucose and glycated haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c).
   The recommended goals are shown in the following table.



           Optimal control indicators for management of diabetes mellitus


  Glycaemic control indicator     Normal        Target    Action needed


  Plasma values

  Pre-meal glucose, mg/dL           <110          90–130        <90 or >150
               mmol/L           <6.1           5.0–7.2         <5.0 or >8.3
  Bedtime glucose, mg/dL           <120         110–150       <110 or >180
               mmol/L           <6.7           6.1–8.3         <6.1 or >10.0

  Whole blood values

  Pre-meal glucose, mg/dL           <100          80–120        <80 or >140
               mmol/L           <5.5           4.4–6.7         <4.4 or >7.8
  Bedtime glucose, mg/dL           <110         100–140       <100 or >160
               mmol/L           <6.1           5.5–7.8         <5.5 or >8.9
  HbA1c (%)                          <6.0            <7.0              >8.0

  Self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) should be available for all people diagnosed with
  diabetes, as an integral part of self-management education.

                                    5

[[PAGE 6]]
             &RP SRQHQWV RI WKH FOLQLF YLVLW


   Each patient visit should cover the following items.

•  Medical history, including:

   −  symptoms of hyper- or hypoglycaemia
   −  results of prior HbA1c and home blood glucose records
   −  meal patterns including frequency and content, and any change in weight
   −  lifestyle and psychosocial elements
   −  any acute complications such as infection, hypoglycaemia or ketoacidosis
   −  any chronic complications related to vision, kidney, nerve, or the cardiovascular system
   −  any associated cardiovascular risk factors such as a positive family history, hypertension,
      dyslipidaemia
   −  review of all medications, ask if the patient is taking aspirin.

•  Physical examination, including:

   −  height and weight
   −  vital signs, including blood pressure supine and sitting
   −  fundoscopic examination, looking for any signs of retinopathy
   −  oral examination, including gums
   −  cardiovascular including evaluation for pulses and bruits
   −  abdominal exam, assess liver size
   −  foot examination, for oedema, ulcer and deformities
   −  neurological examination: light, touch, vibration sense, reflexes, motor strength.

•  Diagnostic studies, including:

   −  fasting and 2-hour postprandial glucose, if feasible
   −  quarterly HbA1c
   −  yearly chemistry panel, fasting lipid profile, urinalysis (including microscopy and urine
      microalbumin screening)
   −  thyroid stimulating hormone for type 1 and for type 2, as indicated
   −  ECG in adults at baseline, and then as clinically indicated.

•  Treatment plan, formulated after discussion with the multidisciplinary diabetes team and
   the patient, including measures to:

   −  control blood glucose
   −  control and treat diabetic complications
   −  address and treat associated risk factors such as obesity, physical inactivity, smoking,
      hypertension, and dyslipidaemia.

•  Referral, if feasible, to:

   −  diabetes educator, to evaluate patient’s ability to perform self-monitoring of blood
      glucose and his/her ability to interpret the data
   −  dietician
   −  foot-care specialist
   −  ophthalmologist for annual retinal screening, or more often as indicated
   −  nephrologists, neurologist, and cardiologist, if needed.


                                    6

[[PAGE 7]]
                       7UHDWP HQWRSWLRQV


•  The backbone of diabetes management is proper diet and regular exercise, which have to
   be individualized. Both could be the only management needed for controlling blood glucose
   in gestational diabetes and IGT and in type 2 diabetes in its early phase.

•  Patients with type 2 diabetes may also require oral hypoglycaemic agents and/or insulin,
   while type 1 patients need insulin therapy to survive.

•  The treatment plan for diabetes may include:

   −  diabetes education: make structured patient education an integral part of the
     management
   −  meal planning and nutritional recommendations: provide access to dietitian
   −  exercise
   −  anti-diabetic oral agents
   −  insulin
   −  management of associated conditions and complications.

$ VSLULQ WKHUDS\

•  Aspirin therapy (75–162 mg/day) is indicated as a secondary prevention in patients with
   evidence of cardiovascular disease.

•   It is also indicated as primary prevention for cardiovascular disease in patients at risk, such
   as age >40, or with hypertension, smoking, obesity, and dyslipidaemia.

3KDUP DFRORJLFDOWKHUDS\

•  When lifestyle modification fail, therapeutic methods should be used that consist of the
   following options:

   −  insulin sensitizers
   −  insulin secretagogues
   −  α-glucosidase inhibitors
   −  insulin.

   The following tables show the different groups and their doses. The physician’s judgment
will direct the method of treatment.





                                   7

[[PAGE 8]]
          Types and mechanisms of action of oral anti-diabetic agents


Group             Name        Recommended    Mode of action
                                           daily dose


Insulin secretagogues

sulfonylureas            glibenclamide   5–20 mg/day       Stimulate insulin secretion
                         glyburide       2.5–20 mg/day     Stimulate insulin secretion
                            glipizide        2.5–20 mg/day     Stimulate insulin secretion
                          glimepiride     1–8 mg/day        Stimulate insulin secretion
                            gliclazide      40–160 mg/day     Stimulate insulin secretion
                            gliclazide LA    30 mg              Stimulate insulin secretion

benzoic acid derivative   repaglinide     3–16 mg/day       Stimulate insulin secretion

phenylalanine derivative  nateglinide     180–360 mg/day   Stimulate insulin secretion

Insulin sensitizers
biguanide              metformin      0.5–2 gm/day      Decrease hepatic glucose
                                                           production
                                                              Increase insulin sensitivity

thiazolidinediones        rosiglitazone    2–8 mg/day        Increase insulin sensitivity
                                                         Decrease hepatic glucose
                                                           production
                         pioglitazone    15–45 mg/day      Increase insulin sensitivity
                                                         Decrease hepatic glucose
                                                           production

α-glucosidase inhibitors  acarbose       100–300 mg/day   Delays carbohydrate absorption

                            miglitol        100–300 mg/day   Delays carbohydrateabsorption


LA: long-acting


                    Types and modes of action of insulin


Insulin                                 Onset of        Peak action    Duration of
                                             action                           action


Insulin alone
Short-acting             Regular/semilente   15–30 minutes   1–3 hours     5–7 hours

Intermediate-acting      NPH/lente          2–4 hours       8–10 hours    18–24 hours

Long-acting               ultralente           4–5 hours       8–14 hours    25–36 hours

Mixed insulin          Regular/NPH (%)
                     30/70
                     50/50
                     20/80             1–2 hours       2–12 hours    6–24 hours

Insulin analogs
Fast-acting                lispro
                         aspart             5–15 min         1–1.5 hours    3–4 hours

Long-acting              glargine            1–2 hours       no peak       24 hours


NPH: neutral protamine Hagedorn

                                  8

[[PAGE 9]]
              $ FXWH FRP SOLFDWLRQV RI GLDEHWHV

+\ SRJO\ FDHP LD

•  Hypoglycaemia in diabetic patients is an abnormally low concentration of glucose in the blood
   caused by insufficient food intake, excessive exercise, or overdosage with oral hypoglycaemic
   agents or insulin.

•  For mild cases: taking small amounts of sugar or glucose-containing juice or food will usually
   help the person feel better within 10–15 minutes. Patients should carry rapidly absorbable
   carbohydrate with them at all times. Glucagon should be available in the home (and possibly
   in the school, day-care centre or workplace). In cases of severe hypoglycaemia and coma,
   the patient should be hospitalized.

' LDEHWLF NHWRDFLGRVLV

•  Ketoacidosis mainly affects people with type 1 diabetes mellitus; it occurs when the body
   breaks down fatty acids and produces ketones.

•  Major precipitating factors include infection, other acute illnesses, and omission of or
   insufficient insulin intake.

•  With proper instruction on monitoring of blood glucose and urine ketones, insulin dose
   adjustment and maintenance of fluid intake many cases of diabetic ketoacidosis can be
   prevented.

•  Hospitalization is needed.

              &KURQLF FRP SOLFDWLRQV RI GLDEHWHV

$ WKHURVFOHURVLV

•  Atherosclerosis is the most common complication of diabetes mellitus accounting for 75% of
   diabetes related-deaths. The occurrence of clinical events related to coronary artery disease
    is four times more common in diabetics.

•  Risk factors are obesity, smoking, hypertension and hypercholesterolaemia.

•  There is ample evidence that aspirin intake confers both primary and secondary prevention
   against cardiovascular disease in patients with diabetes.

5 HWLQRSDWK\

•  Diabetic retinopathy is the leading cause of blindness and visual impairment in adults in the
   Eastern Mediterranean Region. Almost everyone with younger-onset type 1 diabetes mellitus
    will develop diabetic retinopathy after 20 years of the disease.

•  Findings indicating the need for referral as soon as possible to an ophthalmologist for further
  management are:

   −  non-proliferative retinopathy with macular involvement, or without macular involvement
      but with large circinate hard exudates
   −  hard exudates within one disc diameter of the macula
   −  pre-proliferative retinopathy.

•  At present, no drugs are available to prevent development or progression of retinopathy.
                                    9

[[PAGE 10]]
' LDEHWLF NLGQH\ GLVHDVH

•  Diabetic kidney disease is a major cause of premature death in diabetic patients, who are
  17 times as prone to kidney disease as non-diabetics.

•   It can be divided into several stages:

   −  incipient (sub-clinical) nephropathy (albumin excretion rate of 20–200 μg/min or
     30–300mg/24 hours).
   −  clinical (or overt) nephropathy (albumin excretion rate >200 μg/min or >300 mg/24
      hours)
   −  advanced nephropathy with decrease in glomerular filtration rate
   −  end-stage renal disease, necessitating dialysis or renal transplantation.

•  Careful glucose and blood pressure control, and limitation of protein intake is essential in
   patients at risk.

' LDEHWLF QHXURSDWK\

•  Manifestations may occur in both the peripheral and autonomic nervous systems.

•  Peripheral neuropathies include:

   −  polyneuropathies, e.g. distal sensory-motor neuropathy and proximal motor neuropathy
   −  focal neuropathies, e.g. mono-neuropathies (including cranial) and entrapment
      neuropathies.
   −  multifocal neuropathies.

•  Autonomic neuropathies may involve the following systems:

   −  cardiovascular
   −  gastrointestinal
   −  genitourinary.

•  The bare feet should be routinely examined. A simple screening procedure for distal sensory-
   motor neuropathy includes:

   −  inspection of the feet
   −  the grading of vibratory sensation at the dorsum of the toe
   −  the grading of ankle reflexes.





                                   10

[[PAGE 11]]
                   3UHYHQWLRQ RI GLDEHWHV

&RP P XQLW\ DZ DUHQHVV DQG SULP DU\ SUHYHQWLRQ

•   Lifestyle changes aimed at weight control and increased physical activity are important
   objectives in the prevention of type 2 diabetes.

•  Eastern Mediterranean countries should give priority to the development of community-based
   healthy lifestyle programmes that focus on:

   −  maintaining a ‘healthy’ weight
   −  an active lifestyle which includes regular physical activity
   −  early identification of subjects at risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus
   −  identifying subjects at high risk of noncommunicable diseases, such as hypertension,
      diabetes and heart disease
   −  optimal maternal nutrition and weight maintenance
   −  introduction of healthy lifestyle programmes in the early school years. These should
      focus on the prevention of risk factors, which will predispose to noncommunicable
      diseases in later life
   −  cessation of smoking.

•  The benefits of reducing body weight and increasing physical activity are not confined to
   diabetes – they also play a role in reducing heart disease and high blood pressure.

6HFRQGDU\ DQG WHUWLDU\ SUHYHQWLRQ

•  Secondary and tertiary prevention are key to reducing the risk of costly diabetic complications,
   as well as their associated disabilities.

•  There is great potential for tertiary prevention with regard to blindness, limb amputation and
   adverse pregnancy outcomes.

•  Rehabilitation and special assistance are required for those who do develop disabling
   complications.

•   Overall, action taken early in the course of diabetes is more beneficial in terms of quality of life
   as well as being more cost-effective, especially if this action can prevent hospital admission.

•  The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study established the importance of good glucose
   control as well as good blood pressure control in prevention of vascular complications.





                                  11

[[PAGE 12]]
                                 ) XUWKHULQIRUP DWLRQ


    For further information on diabetes mellitus, consult Khatib OMN (ed.) Guidelines for the
  prevention, management and care of diabetes mellitus, Cairo, World Health Organization
  Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean, 2006 (EMRO Technical Publications Series
                    No. 32) on which this card is based, or contact:


                           Noncommunicable Diseases Unit
               WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean
                            PO Box 7608, Nasr City
                                      Cairo 11371, Egypt
                Email: NCD@emro.who.int; Website: http://www.emro.who.int/ncd/


                            Design and layout by Ahmed Hassanein
                                      Printed by Fikra Advertising





978 92 9021 566 0

